Limited Time Offer:
Up to 15% off select mock interviews
🎉
Back to Main
LEARN LOW LEVEL DESIGN
In a Hurry
Introduction
Delivery Framework
Design Principles
OOP Concepts
Design Patterns
Concurrency
Introduction
Correctness
Coordination
Scarcity
Problem Breakdowns
Connect Four
Amazon Locker
Elevator
Parking Lot
File System
Movie Ticket Booking
Rate Limiter
Inventory Management
Vote For New Content
Shaik Manzil
0 Recognition
Pricing
Become a Coach
Search
⌘K

Tutor

Concurrency
Introduction

Learn the fundamentals of concurrency and when it shows up in low-level design interviews.

Watch Video Walkthrough

Watch the author walk through the problem step-by-step

Watch Now
Concurrency is what happens when multiple things try to happen at the same time. Two users book the same flight seat. Three threads update the same counter. A dozen requests hit your cache while it's mid-refresh. The code that worked perfectly in testing suddenly produces impossible results in production.
Concurrency doesn't necessarily show up in every low-level design interview. It depends on the company, the team, and the level. But once you interview for senior roles, it becomes common to either show up directly or get added as a follow-up.
Low-level design interviews focus on single-process systems, so the concurrency here is all threads and shared memory within one program. System design interviews deal with concurrency across multiple servers — that's a different beast. If you're looking for that, check out Dealing with Contention.
In interviews, concurrency shows up in two ways. Sometimes a classic LLD question gets harder: a parking lot that worked fine now has two cars racing for the same spot, or an inventory system where two orders fight over the last item. Other times the prompt is built around concurrency from the start: thread pools, rate limiters, connection pools, schedulers. Either way, the interviewer wants to see if you can reason about what breaks when actions overlap and fix it without overcomplicating things.
This article covers the mental models you need. We'll start with the fundamentals, introduce the primitives you'll reach for, and then map out the three categories of concurrency problems you'll encounter in interviews and how to solve them.
Concurrency Fundamentals
Concurrency starts with a basic fact: threads in the same process share memory.
When a program runs, the operating system creates a process—an isolated container with its own address space and resources. Inside that process, the OS or language runtime can create one or more threads. A thread is an independent execution path. It has its own program counter, registers, and stack, but it shares the heap, globals, and open resources with other threads in the same process.
Concurrency exists whenever multiple threads can make progress independently and their execution can overlap. On multi-core machines, threads may run in parallel. On a single core, the OS rapidly switches between threads and interleaves their instructions. From the program's point of view, both cases are the same: operations from different threads can interleave in unpredictable ways.
That unpredictability is the root of concurrency bugs. Code that looks atomic at the source level is often multiple machine instructions. If two threads read and write shared memory without coordination, the outcome can depend on timing, scheduling, or load. This is why concurrency bugs are often nondeterministic and hard to reproduce.
Most production languages and systems live in this multi-threaded world by default. Java, C++, Go, Rust, C#, and Python all run code concurrently in real systems. That means concurrency should be assumed any time shared state exists.
JavaScript and TypeScript are notable exceptions because user code runs on a single main thread, with concurrency expressed through event loops and async callbacks rather than shared-memory threads.
The Toolbox
Concurrency problems are solved with a small set of primitives that every language provides in some form. You don't need to invent new synchronization mechanisms, you only need to recognize which existing tool fits the problem and how to apply it. The primitives below handle the vast majority of interview scenarios.
Already comfortable with concurrency primitives? Skip ahead to Three Problem Types to see how they map to interview scenarios. Each primitive is covered in depth in Correctness, Coordination, and Scarcity. This section just serves as a quick reference.
Atomics
Atomics provide thread-safe operations on single variables without locks. Under the hood, they use CPU instructions like compare-and-swap (CAS) that complete in one uninterruptible step.
Python is a corner case that lacks native atomics, so you'll need locks to safely increment counters across threads. The example below shows using threading.Lock to protect a shared counter.
atomics.py
Python
Language
import threading

lock = threading.Lock()
counter = 0

with lock:
    counter += 1  # Protected increment (Python lacks native atomics)

Use atomics for counters, flags, and simple statistics. They're fast but limited to single variables, so the moment you need to update two things together, atomics no longer help.
Used in: Correctness for read-modify-write on single variables.
Locks (Mutexes)
Locks provide mutual exclusion. When a thread holds a lock, other threads trying to acquire it block until the first thread releases. This creates a critical section where only one thread executes at a time.
locks.py
Python
Language
import threading

lock = threading.Lock()

with lock:
    # Only one thread can be here at a time
    balance += amount

Locks are your default tool for protecting shared state. The main variants are coarse-grained (one lock for everything), fine-grained (per-resource locks), and read-write (multiple readers OR one writer).
Used in: Correctness for check-then-act and multi-field updates.
Semaphores
Semaphores are counting locks. Instead of binary locked/unlocked, a semaphore has N permits. Threads acquire permits before proceeding and release them when done. When permits hit zero, threads block until someone releases.
semaphores.py
Python
Language
import threading

permits = threading.Semaphore(5)  # Allow 5 concurrent operations
permits.acquire()  # Block if no permits available
try:
    do_work()
finally:
    permits.release()  # Always release, even on exception

Use semaphores to limit concurrent operations, like when you can have at most 5 downloads or at most 10 API calls at a given time.
Used in: Scarcity for limiting concurrent operations and resource budgets.
Condition Variables
Condition variables let threads wait efficiently for a condition to become true. A thread acquires a lock, checks a condition, and if not satisfied, waits. This atomically releases the lock and puts the thread to sleep. When another thread signals, waiters wake up and re-check.
condition_variables.py
Python
Language
import threading

condition = threading.Condition()

with condition:
    while not ready:
        condition.wait()  # Release lock and sleep
    # Condition is now true

Condition variables are the building block for blocking queues, but you rarely use them directly in interviews.
Used in: Coordination as the foundation for blocking queues.
Blocking Queues
Blocking queues combine a queue with condition variables to provide thread-safe producer-consumer handoff. Producers call put() to add items; if full, they block. Consumers call take() to remove items; if empty, they block.
blocking_queues.py
Python
Language
import queue

q = queue.Queue(maxsize=100)
q.put(task)   # Blocks if queue is full
t = q.get()   # Blocks if queue is empty

The queue handles all synchronization internally making it your go-to tool for handing work between threads.
Used in: Coordination for producer-consumer and async processing. Also in Scarcity for resource pooling.
Language Reference
Here is a quick reference of concurrency primitives across common interview languages.
Concept	Java	Python	Go	C++	C#
Lock/Mutex	synchronized / ReentrantLock	threading.Lock	sync.Mutex	std::mutex	lock / Monitor
Read-write lock	ReentrantReadWriteLock	N/A (3rd party)	sync.RWMutex	std::shared_mutex	ReaderWriterLockSlim
Condition variable	Object.wait/notify	threading.Condition	sync.Cond	std::condition_variable	Monitor.Wait/Pulse
Semaphore	Semaphore	threading.Semaphore	x/sync/semaphore	std::counting_semaphore	SemaphoreSlim
Blocking queue	LinkedBlockingQueue	queue.Queue	buffered channel	manual	BlockingCollection
Atomic integer	AtomicInteger	N/A (use Lock)	sync/atomic	std::atomic<int>	Interlocked
Concurrent map	ConcurrentHashMap	N/A (GIL)	sync.Map	tbb::concurrent_hash_map	ConcurrentDictionary
Notes:
Python's GIL means CPU-bound code doesn't benefit from threads, but I/O-bound code does. Use multiprocessing for CPU parallelism.
Go channels replace blocking queues and condition variables idiomatically. When in doubt, use a channel.
C++ often requires manual composition of primitives. Consider Intel TBB for higher-level abstractions.
Three Problem Types
Most concurrency problems in interviews fall into three categories. The surface details change - inventory systems, booking systems, rate limiters - but the underlying failure modes don't. Learning to see past the domain and into the problem type is the skill we'll cover in this article.
Correctness problems happen when shared state gets corrupted. Two threads both check that a seat is available, both see yes, both book it. One booking gets lost.
Coordination problems happen when threads need to hand off work or wait for each other. A producer adds tasks to a queue, consumers process them. If the queue is empty, consumers need to wait efficiently without burning CPU. If the queue is full, producers need to slow down.
Scarcity problems happen when resources are limited. You have 10 database connections but 100 concurrent requests. Some requests must wait.
Problem Type	What Breaks	Solutions	Common Problems
Correctness	Shared state is updated concurrently	Locks, atomics, thread confinement	Check-then-act, read-modify-write
Coordination	Threads need ordering or handoff	Blocking queues, actors, event loops	Async request processing, bursty traffic
Scarcity	Resources are limited	Semaphores, resource pools	Concurrent op limits, resource consumption, object reuse
Most questions start with correctness. Coordination and scarcity often appear as follow-ups once shared state exists or throughput increases. Real systems frequently involve more than one category, but separating them makes it easier to reason about each concern in isolation.
What's Next
The articles that follow dive into each problem category in turn. Each explains what breaks, why it breaks, and which primitives to reach for. The goal is establish pattern recognition so you can diagnose concurrency risks early, pick the right tool, and explain your reasoning clearly.
Start with Correctness if you want to understand how shared state gets corrupted and how locks and atomics prevent it. Move to Coordination for producer-consumer patterns and async processing, then finish with Scarcity for resource pooling and rate limiting.

Mark as read

Next: Correctness

How would you rate the quality of this article?

0.5 Stars
1 Star
1.5 Stars
2 Stars
2.5 Stars
3 Stars
3.5 Stars
4 Stars
4.5 Stars
5 Stars
Empty
Comments

(20)

Comment
Anonymous
Posting as Shaik Manzil
​
Sort By
Popular
Sort By
Hamad Khan
Top 5%
• 2 months ago

Hello interview releases stuff right as you need them. Anyone else agree?

47

Reply

Evan King

Admin
• 2 months ago

Always trying to read your mind 😉

33

Reply
Akash
Premium
• 2 months ago

please release LLD  book my show , on my mind

4

Reply

Evan King

Admin
• 2 months ago

Coming soon!

10

Reply
kanishth arora
Premium
• 1 month ago

Please release video on RobinHood System Design

0

Reply
D
DifferentCyanDuck503
Premium
• 2 months ago

working the Meta way. Ship fast and improvise

1

Reply
R
RapidBlueSilverfish487
Premium
• 2 months ago

Yes, I'm preparing for an interview which requires concurrency and multi-threading knowledge. Would be great to see if there's a video tutorial on a problems like "Leetcode 1242. Web Crawler Multithreaded". I see this has been a problem that Anthropic has asked a few times.

5

Reply
F
FascinatingAmethystMarsupial369
Top 1%
• 2 months ago

I have been studying concurrency lately because a lot of companies are asking them, and then you drop this gold! Thank you

2

Reply
Joe Mcerlane
Premium
• 1 month ago

It s been a while since I touched all this so love the refresh. Dare I ask too much for rust examples too

1

Reply
Anand Pandey
Premium
• 1 month ago

Awesome Content. Hello Interview is right on point , everytime!!

1

Reply
Show All Comments
The best mocks on the market.

Now up to 15% off

Learn More
Reading Progress

On This Page

Concurrency Fundamentals

The Toolbox

Language Reference

Three Problem Types

What's Next

Schedule a mock interview

Meet with a FAANG senior+ engineer or manager and learn exactly what it takes to get the job.

Schedule A Mock Interview
Questions
Meta SWE Interview Questions
Amazon SWE Interview Questions
Google SWE Interview Questions
OpenAI SWE Interview Questions
Engineering Manager (EM) Interview Questions
Learn
Learn System Design
Learn DSA
Learn Behavioral
Learn ML System Design
Learn Low Level Design
Guided Practice
Links
FAQ
Pricing
Gift Mock Interviews
Gift Premium
Become a Coach
Our Coaches
Hello Interview Premium
Legal
Terms and Conditions
Privacy Policy
Contact
About Us
Product Support

7511 Greenwood Ave North
Unit #4238 Seattle
WA 98103

© 2026 Optick Labs Inc. All rights reserved.